Once around Proion.
So Proion is the brightest star in the
little constellation Canis Minor, the
small dog. And I think it comes in as
the eighth brightest star in the whole
sky with a magnitude of just 0.34.
So one of the bright stars of the winter
sky. And you can see it marked on the
map there. We have Orion to the right.
The brightest star of all the skies,
Sirius. and it's near twin down at the
bottom and proion there making a
triangle with Betalers the red giant
star in Orion.
So the name comes from the Greek and it
means before the dog and this is a
reference to it leading the way across
the sky for Sirius the dog star.
Doesn't look like it's leading it in the
photograph I just showed but it does
rise first. Um, and if you're nearer the
equator than I am, then it certainly
makes more sense.
It's one of the sun's relatively near
neighbors, 11.46 light years away,
determined by par parallax method, again
using the Hipparos satellite. Um, it's a
very bright star and so GIA doesn't like
to look at it. Uh, it overwhelms the
optics.
So, with it being so close, it does
appear very bright indeed in the sky,
but it's a slightly more modest star
than Sirius. Class F5, so hotter than
the sun at a temperature of 6,500
Kelvin. Uh, the sun is about 5,800
and that makes it white with just a hint
of yellow in it. So, the color index
just 0.42 42 zero precisely would be
white I believe. And physically it's at
one and a half times the mass of the sun
and about double the radius with an age
of a relatively young 1.7 billion years
about a third as old as the sun itself.
So that places it in the middle of the
Herzbrung Russell diagram on the main
sequence line. And you can see it there
just above the sun just next to where
the tip of the Bant giant branch leads
away from the main sequence just below
Alter and Sirius.
But at the moment it is beginning to
swell. It's becoming a subgiant. It's
about to head off up that giant branch.
It's used almost all of its hydrogen in
its core fusing it to helium. And it
will soon start to swell up, become a
giant, expand by a factor of a hundred
in radius, and the outer layers will
cool off and turn into the
characteristic orange and red color.
So the small inert core of helium in the
center is building up and the hydrogen
is fusing away around that, dumping yet
more helium into it. Outside of that,
there's a radiative zone carrying the
heat outwards followed by the
convectional layer leading the heat all
the way to the surface.
Now, Proion is in fact a binary star
system and this was one of the early
successes of astrometry, the process by
which you measure the position of a star
on the sky from year to year, from
decade to decade. and see if there are
repeating changes. This has been
attempted many times to try to find out
if there are unseen companions in orbit
around each other rather than just a
single object and in particular the hunt
for planets and people like Peter
Vanderamp looking at Barnard star as a
very famous example. But Friedick Bessel
in 1844 suggested that he had
measurements indicating that this was a
binary and that there was a wobble in
its motion. And 20 years or so later,
the orbit was then calculated.
And this was all known before anyone
managed to see it. That took another 30
years or so before the uh really
powerful telescopes like the Lick 36in
telescope were brought in on things and
were able to actually resolve the two
objects visually as separate.
So we now know that Proion B is a small
white dwarf companion star going around
the main A star quite faint at magnitude
10.7 and only four arcsec away. So
that's why it was so difficult to spot
it until we had these giant uh
telescopes.
You can see the diagram of the orbit
there, slightly elliptical and taking
just over 40 years to go round with an
orbit that goes from about 9 to about 21
astronomical units. So an AU, the
Earth's sun distance, 150 million
kilometers, 93 million miles. This is
eight or nine of those going out to 21.
And that's the scale of the outer solar
system essentially. It's uh from the
orbit of around about Saturn out to
somewhere beyond uh Uranus, maybe
getting on for Neptune.
But uh it's slightly tilted compared to
our line of sight. So we see it as more
elliptical in nature than it would
otherwise be if we were absolutely face
on. So the star itself, a white dwarf,
60% the mass of the sun, is very cool.
Most white dwarfs we think of as being
the dead nuclear cores of uh powerful
stars that have puffed off their outer
layers and often with very very high
temperatures producing their light in
the ultraviolet part of the spectrum at
100,000°.
Well, this one is cool. 7,740
Kelvin. That's still quite hot, but it's
much cooler than your typical example of
a white dwarf. And well, it's a
relatively low mass one at 60% the mass
of the sun, but it's very, very old.
It's 1.2 billion years old as a white
dwarf. This progenitor star is even
older than that. Um, but it's been a
white dwarf for over a billion years.
And as it has been, it's been cooling by
uh radiating its energy away and the
temperature has come all the way down to
this uh relatively modest temperature.
The progenitor star would have been
around about two and a half times the
mass of the sun and would have carried
on being a normal main sequence star
converting hydrogen to helium in the
core for about 600 million years
and then it would have died,
gone through the red giant phase,
produced a planetary nebula and then
formed the white dwarf that we see
today. And so around about 1.1 billion
years ago, something like that, it would
have undergone that transition.
Now eventually the A star that we see as
the brighter companion these days, but
actually a lower mass object living
longer because of that lower mass will
follow the same route. And what we'll
end up with is a binary white dwarf
system with the A and B components
still going around each other. But in
the process of the A star turning into a
giant and throwing off its outer layers,
a lot of that material may get accreted
onto the B star. And so B may gain mass,
but I don't think it's going to gain
enough mass in this process
to cause a type 1A supernova. It's got
would have to go from 6 of a solar mass
all the way to 1.44.
Uh so it would have to gain 08 of a
solar mass and it's very unlikely that
it will be able to do that from the uh
existing a star which only has 2 and a
half solar masses in the first place and
will keep a substantial amount of that
itself uh in the white dwarf that it
forms and a lot of the material is going
to escape in directions that do not
result in it landing back on the white
dwarf. Um, it would be quite bad if we
had a type 1A supernova on our doorstep,
but I suspect we have many hundreds of
millions of years to go before that's
going to occur before ProSion A starts
to feed its companion, by which time the
motion of the stars around the galaxy
will have carried the Proion system well
away from us.
Its neighbor in space is Luchin star and
I've done a talk all about Lutin star.
That's just 1.2 light years away from
Proion and you can see it marked on the
map there with a little red ring around
it with the A and B sorry alpha and beta
components of Canis M uh Kennes minor
the little dog there proion at the
bottom and the beta star at the top
there. So forming a triangle with them,
a right triangle,
Luton star. And not only are they close
in line of sight, but they're actually
nearest neighbors in space.
They say that uh you'd be able to see
Leon star as a magnitude 4.6 star from a
planet orbiting Proion.
But at the moment, we don't know of any
such planets. This would be interesting
to discover to see if either the A or
the B white dwarf had any planets
orbiting around them. But so far
attempts to locate such things have not
come up with anything. So thanks very
much for listening. That was a very
quick once around the star proion.